---
title: Accessibility
order: 2
anchor-link: accessibility-accordion
---
Since the beginning of the pandemic, almost everyone has been exposed to greater amounts of mental and physical stress. As with the transmission of the virus itself, however, these effects are not evenly distributed throughout the population. Figures for the United States at large indicate that levels of pandemic-related psychological distress are higher among young people, those with lower income, women, and people with disabilities. Adults aged 18-24 in particular are even more  likely to report heightened mental distress than the general population.[^6]

Professors, teaching assistants, and support staff have witnessed this crisis among college students first-hand. Many have struggled to address it even as they themselves deal with heightened stress and anxiety. A great number of the difficulties they encounter come from universities’ overreliance on individual solutions (<a href="https://csc.virginia.edu/feature/resources-well-being-during-covid-19">meditation, better time management, yoga workshops</a>) to address a social problem--the pandemic. This resonates with a wider critique, long held by disability rights activists and scholars, that health and ability are socially constructed categories rather than objective descriptions of an individual’s physical or mental state.[^7] Scholar and disability rights activist Jay Timothy Dolmage reminds us in <i>Academic Ableism</i> (2014) that under current social and legal conditions, “we will all become disabled at some point in our lives.”[^8] By pushing so many people into states of physical and mental distress so suddenly, the pandemic has shown how true this statement is. It is clear that it is no longer feasible to consider disability a problem of weak or unfortunate individuals.[^9]

We argue that effectively countering the widespread effects of the pandemic requires adjustments of a similar scale in how universities treat access and disability. These adjustments start in the classroom, but ultimately necessitate long term changes in policy and institutional priorities as well. We emphasize the importance of structural transformation because much of higher ed already defines achievement in a very narrow and ableist manner. Dolmage argues in <i>Academic Ableism</i> that the prevailing educational philosophy in the United States views disability as “inimical to or out of place at the university.” This is of a piece with a broader attitude about higher education as “a place to sort society based on the education of the ‘deserving’ few, rather than as the place to elevate society based on the education of all of its citizens.”[^10] 

Because of this underlying assumption, the legal mechanisms put in place to accommodate students with disabilities often fell short even prior to the pandemic. Some of this was due to lack of resources for the overall number of students with disabilities, which the Department of Education estimates is at least 20% of all college students.[^11] Disability rights activist and UVA graduate student Nicole Schroeder has pointed out that dividing the national average for university accommodations funding by UVA’s projected disabled student body leads to a per-disabled student spending of just $77.[^12]

Additional limitations of the current system emerge from its largely reactive, as opposed to proactive, approach. For example, a student may be referred to the Student Disability Access Center (SDAC) only <i>after</i> their grades begin to fall. An estimated 2/3 of disabled college students “don’t receive accommodations simply because their colleges don’t know about their disabilities.”[^13] Dolmage points out in <i>Academic Ableism</i> that most students who do receive accommodations don’t get them until their third or fourth year of college.[^14] More, the current overreliance on providing individual accommodations puts the onus on students to 1) seek a formal diagnosis, thus having to navigate a medical establishment rife with its own ableist assumptions and inequities;  2) disclose their diagnosis to faculty by a certain point in time; and 3) describe their needs in ways which fall within the current legal definitions of “disabled.”[^15]

We therefore urge our fellow instructors to consider methods of course design and assessment based on principles of Universal Design for Learning (UDL). UDL is the pedagogical subset of the broader concept of Universal Design, which one founder described as “the design of products and environments to be usable by all people, to the greatest extent possible, without the need for adaptation or specialized design.” The “Universal” in UDL calls for teachers to “structure space and pedagogy in the broadest possible manner,” thus (ideally) negating the need for individual students to pursue individual accommodations.[^16] UDL has the added benefit of addressing student needs that are not often defined under the category of “disability.” Grief due to the sudden loss of a loved one; stress due to a sudden loss of income; depression due to isolation and lack of social contact--all of these are common conditions of life, not just pandemic life, and have a significant impact on students’ ability to meet certain academic standards in healthy ways.   

UDL classroom practices are widely documented and, with a little work up front, easily implemented, particularly in conjunction with digital pedagogical tools and frameworks which . While we do not have the space to conduct an exhaustive review, we offer a few options and resources here to instructors who seek to move beyond accommodations and make access a core element of course design. Some practices, such as asynchronous courses, captioning for live events, and recording lectures, became more normalized as a result of the pandemic. We urge instructors to continue these practices even as we begin to shift back to in-person instruction, and to consider these additional practices as well:

<ul>
    <li>Flexible deadlines</li>
    <li>Flexible attendance policies</li>
    <li>Assigning an “<a href="https://dh.uoregon.edu/2018/04/02/defining-the-unessay/">Unessay</a>” instead of a traditional paper</li>
    <li>Utilizing “<a href="https://muse.jhu.edu/book/78367">ungrading</a>” practices in our <a href="#assessment-accordion">assessment</a></li>
</ul>

However, we acknowledge that the classroom is not a vacuum within the institution of the university. The most obvious point of intervention is in funding for accessibility services, but without greater transparency than UVA currently provides, it is impossible to know how much of Student Health’s $20 million budget goes to divisions such as SDAC or Counseling and Psychological Services (CAPS).[^17] Increased funding alone is insufficient, however, without changes in institutional priorities and approaches towards student success. As Dolmage warns in <i>Academic Ableism</i>, universities have begun to use UDL as a signal of progressive pedagogy without attacking the more deeply rooted assumption that higher ed is a mechanism for sorting people into “deserving” and “undeserving” types. 

UVA’s history of acknowledging and addressing disabled students’ needs demonstrates that these assumptions are alive and well, but also capable of being challenged for the better. Take, for instance, various contestations over undergraduate housing on the Lawn. In UVA’s own words, “<a href="https://housing.virginia.edu/area/1176">[it] is considered an honor to live in one of the University’s prestigious rooms on the Lawn</a>,” yet it took until 2020 for <a href="https://news.virginia.edu/content/university-makes-two-lawn-rooms-ada-accessible">two rooms to be modified for ADA-compliance</a>. The previous absence of these rooms precluded students with certain physical disabilities from even hoping to compete for this marker of academic and social achievement. <a href="https://news.virginia.edu/content/university-makes-two-lawn-rooms-ada-accessible">Only after organized student activism did the University recognize the need for change</a>. Now, new calls are being made by UVA students for an even more equitable selection process. Undergraduate Noah Strike <a href="https://www.cavalierdaily.com/article/2020/10/strike-reform-the-lawn-selection-process">writes</a> that the current emphasis on high GPA and only certain forms of community service biases heavily against transfer students, international students, and first-generation and low income students. To this list, we add students whose disabilities make achieving traditional academic and social success more difficult. 

We offer the case of the Lawn as illustrative of how certain arbitrary markers of honor, prestige, and accomplishment at UVA assume an equitable meritocracy, but in reality, perpetuate ableist assumptions about what it means to “do well” in higher ed. For this reason, in addition to calling for greater budget transparency and a greater material investment in services for disabled students, we also call for:

<ul>
    <li>The implementation of a permanent and universal system of Credit/No Credit grading, and the elimination of the Deans’ List and all grade point averages. (We explore the necessity for less rigid and competitive assessment scales in the <a href="#assessment-accordion">following section</a>.)</li>
</ul>

Finally, to our fellow students we ask the following. 

<ul>
    <li><i>When in doubt, reach out.</i> We hope more of us can push past the culture of individual achievement and think of learning as a communal enterprise rather than an individual one, built on relationships and mutual empathy. We know as well as you do that some faculty are less inclined to accommodate the needs of their students, but many instructors are here to help as long as they know help is needed.</li>
    <li>Embrace existing mechanisms for helping one another succeed (<a href="https://yukon.accessiblelearning.com/s-virginia/ApplicationNotetaker.aspx">such as applying to become a notetaker in your classes</a>) and strive to create new mechanisms where none currently exist. For those of us who consider ourselves able-bodied and able-minded, the pandemic may have been our first brush with long-term feelings of social isolation and mental unwellness. We hope these experiences can generate a greater recognition of our collective vulnerability and a greater sense of mutual responsibility.</li>
</ul>

<h4><i>Notes</i></h4>

[^6]: Czeisler MÉ, Lane RI, Petrosky E, Wiley JF, Christensen A, Njai R, Weaver MD, Robbins R, Facer-Childs ER, Barger LK, Czeisler CA, Howard ME, Rajaratnam SMW. Mental Health, Substance Use, and Suicidal Ideation During the COVID-19 Pandemic - United States, June 24-30, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020 Aug 14;69(32):1049-1057. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6932a1. PMID: 32790653; PMCID: PMC7440121.
[^7]: For a brief treatment of how disability was historically constructed through the US immigration system, see Douglas Bayton, <i>Defectives in the Land: Disability and Immigration in the Age of Eugenics</i>, (Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 2016). For an in-depth study on the ways in which disability is constructed in the US legal system, see Claire Liachowitz, <i>Disability as a Social Construct: Legislative Roots</i>, (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1988), Accessed May 1, 2021, <a href="http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt3fj3f4.Copy">http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt3fj3f4.Copy</a>.
[^8]: Jay Dolmage, <i>Academic Ableism: Disability and Higher Education</i> (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2017), https://doi.org/10.3998/mpub.9708722, 22.
[^9]: The connections between the categories of “mental health,” “mental illness,” and “disability” are not always self-evident, especially for those who more typically associate the latter with physical, (or at the very least, chronic), impairments. A broader definition of disabled as being unable to do or accomplish certain normative tasks--whether that’s being independently mobile or being able to keep up with academic deadlines--allows us to consider a broader range of conditions as well, even ones which end up being temporary.
[^10]: Dolmage, 62.
[^11]: “Digest of Education Statistics, 2018 - Chapter 3: Postsecondary Education,” accessed May 1, 2021, <a href="https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d18/ch_3.asp">https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d18/ch_3.asp</a>. The same report does not cite a figure for students in graduate and professional programs.
[^12]: Nicole Schroeder, “Accessibility & Universal Design in Higher Education,” <a href="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1PcheSIhree9IJhLI0bbjoMQTraxsbI1u/edit#slide=id.p1" class="dont-break-out">https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1PcheSIhree9IJhLI0bbjoMQTraxsbI1u/edit#slide=id.p1</a>.
[^13]: Allie Grasgreen, “Dropping the Ball on Disabilities,” accessed May 1, 2021, <a href="https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/04/02/students-disabilities-frustrated-ignorance-and-lack-services">https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/04/02/students-disabilities-frustrated-ignorance-and-lack-services.</a>
[^14]: Dolmage, 22.
[^15]: For a short, general overview of ableism within the medical establishment, see Heidi L. Janz, “Ableism: The Undiagnosed Malady Afflicting Medicine,” Canadian Medical Association Journal 191, no. 17 (April 29, 2019): E478–79, https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.180903.
[^16]: Dolmage, 115-118. See the entire chapter “Universal Design” in Dolmage’s book for an excellent overview of the concept, its wider applications, and its implementation in higher ed.
[^17]: “University of Virginia Proposed FY2020-21 Revised Operating Budget,” <a href="https://financialplanning.vpfinance.virginia.edu/sites/financialplanning.virginia.edu/files/FY2021%20Revised%20Academic%20Division%20Budget%20Summary%20-%20FINAL.pdf" class="dont-break-out">https://financialplanning.vpfinance.virginia.edu/sites/financialplanning.virginia.edu/files/FY2021%20Revised%20Academic%20Division%20Budget%20Summary%20-%20FINAL.pdf</a>, n.d.
