---
title: Labor 
order: 6
anchor-link: labor
---
### LABOR
Even if we only think of pedagogy as what happens in the classroom – a perspective this Manifesto expressly argues against, but one its authors recognize many people adopt – we must still acknowledge that pedagogy is work, both for instructors and for students. It deserves to be framed, discussed, and compensated in those terms. While education workers often talk about our love for our jobs and our students before all else, the truth is that more often than not, [the work will not love us back](https://www.teenvogue.com/story/sarah-jaffe-work-wont-love-you-back-book). Indeed, love for the work is something our employers weaponize against us to justify paying us smaller wages, granting fewer benefits, and denying us stable employment.

<div id="gradlabor">
Like many peer institutions of higher ed, UVA does not always talk about the people it employs in terms of the labor they do for the University. A 2020 announcement for graduate teaching awards, for instance, refers to graduate students’ teaching as “part of their training,” and Teaching Assistants (TAs) themselves as “budding professors.” While TA-ing is indeed a valuable part of many graduate students’ education, it also provides essential labor for the University. Large courses with complex assignments require teams of graders; labs and studios require trained assistants; small college writing courses require dedicated instructors. 

The University’s tendency towards euphemism regarding its teaching workforce is particularly apparent in how it describes its contingent faculty. Workers who may be categorized by another institution as “adjuncts”--that is to say, faculty who are ineligible for tenure--are referred to as “general faculty” or “Wage Faculty Employees” at UVA. Both terms manage to avoid visions of precarity, low pay, and lessened prestige many of us now associate with “adjunct” while keeping those conditions intact. 

Non-teaching labor is just as essential to the functioning of the University and the fulfillment of its pedagogical mission, but is often even more precarious, poorly compensated, and at times, taken for granted. When UVA promised its students an “on-Grounds experience” last Fall, it relied on the in-person labor of custodians, food service workers, librarians, and support staff to make that experience happen. Yet unlike faculty and some student employees, UVA’s frontline workers were not given the choice to stay home while keeping their jobs. Like employers across the country, UVA has thanked these essential workers for their service while repeatedly neglecting to give them hazard pay. Moreover, some workers with the choice to stay remote have reported feeling pressured to work in-person before they felt fully safe doing so. “People are feeling rather expendable and sacrificial,” one employee told a local reporter.
</div>

We simply cannot imagine good pedagogy being produced under such precarious, stressful, and demanding conditions. This does not mean workers aren’t giving their all – in many cases, faculty, staff, and other employees have given everything they have and more. Rather, it means that the University’s leaders have not created the necessary conditions to support and sustain these workers.

While the particular stresses and circumstances of the past year have been somewhat unique, the underlying causes for worker dissatisfaction and exploitation at UVA are much older. It was only in 2019 that President Ryan raised the hourly wage of full time workers at UVA to $15 an hour, a victory won by student and worker activists after decades of organizing. Student workers continue to be excluded from this policy, with our hourly minimum wage remaining at [$8.75 an hour](https://provost.virginia.edu/wage-authorization-academic-areas) (to be raised to $9.50 in May 2021).

Low pay is just one of many ways in which the University devalues those who work in its most critical positions. The janitor who cleans the classroom, the dining worker who serves students their meals, the technicians who maintain our electronic devices, the nurses and doctors treating students at Student Health, all have as much a hand in fulfilling the mission of the University as faculty and teaching staff. Yet rarely do we see these workers treated with the respect – nevermind given the compensation – they deserve. Instead, they’re inevitably the first to lose pay, lose shifts, and [lose jobs when money is tight](https://www.cavalierdaily.com/article/2020/04/u-va-contracted-aramark-workers-laid-off-without-severance-notice-amid-covid-19-facility-closures). Many of these workers are employed through private contractors such as Aramark, a company known for its [unfair and discriminatory labor practices](https://www.corp-research.org/aramark). Privatization itself is a shift away from equitable labor standards, as wage workers from 