---
title: Coda
order: 9
anchor-link: coda-accordion
handwriting: elise
---

The present state of digital pedagogy at UVA seems to many teachers and students to be a grim landscape, something we're all too eager to put behind us as the University plans for a "[much more normal](https://news.virginia.edu/content/uva-plans-return-person-instruction-more-normal-operations-fall)" Fall 2021 semester. Yet even if another global pandemic does not come in our lifetimes--[a prospect many scientists find unlikely](https://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2021/03/19/979314118/next-pandemic-scientists-fear-another-coronavirus-could-jump-from-animals-to-hum)--online learning is almost certainly [here to stay](https://www.theguardian.com/education/2021/feb/16/the-future-of-online-learning-the-long-term-trends-accelerated-by-covid-19). Governments, corporations, and universities, UVA included, are already probing the possibilities of what this brave new world might look like. As humanists, scholars, engaged citizens, we cannot let the pursuit of profit and prestige drive this conversation. The present state of digital pedagogy may, for most of us, be inextricably linked to the traumas and crises of our plague year. The future of digital pedagogy, however, is still what we choose to make of it. 

To demonstrate a possible version of that future, we offer our own year in the Scholars’ Lab as a counterexample. 

As this year's Praxis Cohort, the six of us have spent the past academic year meeting remotely two to three times a week to learn entirely new skills with an almost entirely new group of people. Critically, we are all fully funded, with finances dealt with in an upfront and transparent way. We had assignments with flexible deadlines and no grades, were encouraged to collaborate, and deliberately fostered an environment of mutual care, respect, and camraderie. We established connections over Zoom, WeChat, Slack, and Discord, had movie and game nights, and met all of one another’s pets. We became friends.

We don’t think we’ve succeeded at building a community because we’re special people. Rather, we were given the necessary environment in which to flourish, in spite of the chaos in our lives and in the world. We succeeded because, as Brandon Walsh kept reminding us, “You’re already successes in our eyes.” 

What would the past two semesters at UVA have looked like if every administrator, instructor, and student had approached the pedagogical experience along these lines? If decision-makers had looked at online learning, not as a financial opportunity or a challenge to be forced onto teachers and students, but as a space to try new ways of relating to and experiencing education? Would they have felt so pressured to bring students back and put themselves, University employees, and the surrounding community at risk? Would professors have kept up strict grading and deadline policies? Would students have struggled so much to feel they were still learning and building community from afar? Of course, we can't know for certain how things might have been. But we can listen to students and workers about [the many ways in which they experienced education over the past year](/data). We can tell the [story of the pandemic at UVA](/story) in as many ways as possible--some celebratory, others mournful. Moving forward, we can try to build something stronger, more accessible, and more just. 

As several of us remarked at the start of our year together, the pandemic drove us into isolation because the virus relied on our connectivity to one another. Yet even as our cohort met and worked together through our computer screens, we remembered the connections were still there: just as vital, just as demanding of respect, care, and love. We will carry the connections we established into the physical world when, hopefully, we'll all get to meet in person for the first time. We hope the same will be true for higher education writ large in our post-pandemic future. 

One last note: Very few of the issues we’ve outlined here are unique to UVA, or even to higher education. However, we felt it was important to highlight how these big structures manifest in local and specific ways shaped by our own local histories of domination and resistance. We did this to establish not only how connected we all are to the problem, but also how close we are to the solutions. Over and over again, we discovered many of the answers to our questions already growing in our own backyards. Through ***Connections Established***, we hoped simply to create a hub for these problems, solutions, and ideas to interact with one another. We hope our audiences, whether you come from near or far, are able to take something useful from this project and plant it in your own soil. 