---
layout: page
title: Manifesto
permalink: /manifesto
---
<!--
## Manifesto

### AT “JEFFERSON’S UNIVERSITY,” WE LOVE A PREAMBLE
The COVID-19 pandemic has irrevocably changed the way college and university instructors are teaching and students are learning. The nearly complete shift to remote learning will, in some instances, be permanent; pandemic pedagogy may be temporary, but digital pedagogy is here to stay. At the University of Virginia, the suddenness of this shift, the undemocratic means through which it was implemented, and the crisis conditions under which it took place have left little time for reflection. Many instructors, students, and staff alike have scarcely been able to breathe, let alone recover, grieve, and rethink our way through digital pedagogy during a global pandemic. As a consequence, corporations and higher ed institutions alike have been able to deploy a shock doctrine approach to online learning. Part of this has arrived in the technological form of what Jeffrey Moro calls “[cop shit](https://jeffreymoro.com/blog/2020-02-13-against-cop-shit/),” or “any pedagogical technique or technology that presumes an adversarial relationship between students and teachers,” which describes much of what is offered to the public university by private corporations seeking to make a profit. Another part of it came under the guise of reproducing normality in decidedly abnormal circumstances: students invited back to campus with promises of an “on-Grounds experience,” instructors and staff paid the same wages to work in-person under dangerous conditions, faculty handing out the same workload and assessments to overburdened students, University leadership expecting faculty to adapt their courses to online and hybrid models overnight. 
This search for normalcy during a pandemic which has claimed the lives of over 530,000 people in the United States at time of writing is, itself, potentially fatal. Students and employees of the University of Virginia are risking their health and their lives to recreate normal pedagogical conditions, but have found this to be an impossible task. It does not take much digging to find student and employee testimonials scattered across the internet about how stressed, depressed, and terrified they are as a consequence of hybrid learning. Moreover, we have discovered--either for the first or the hundredth time--that “normal pedagogical conditions” were themselves damaging to teaching and learning to begin with. Cop shit in classrooms predates the pandemic, as do harmful methods of academic assessment, unhealthy attitudes towards work and achievement, and unfair labor practices.
In this Manifesto, we argue for a pedagogical practice that starts with treating students, instructors, and other University employees as full human beings brought into community with one another by love and need alike. Love for learning, love for the things we study and teach, love for the people we work with, yes--but also, need for money to pay the bills, jobs to pay off the debt, healthcare to keep ourselves alive. We say “full humans” not to approximate the feel-good language of corporate wellness culture, but to describe a basic social truth: that when students walk into a classroom to learn, or instructors walk into a classroom to teach, they bring their full selves into that space. More, that transmission of knowledge is only made possible by the labor of thousands of people who help keep our classrooms clean, our computers running, and our physical needs met. *Everything that happens in the University is connected to pedagogy in some way.*
This portion of Connection Established is a call to action from this year’s Praxis cohort to our fellow members of the UVA community. We are using the unique and empowering space we’ve been given through the Scholars’ Lab to voice our concerns, frustrations, and ideas about the practice of digital pedagogy here at UVA. Another portion of our project is dedicated to exploring and documenting what the experience of digital pedagogy has been like for students and instructors through an interactive narrative. The two halves are intended to be experienced in conversation with one another, as they each emphasize different aspects of how we’ve come to think about pandemic learning. Both highlight the interconnectedness of teaching, learning, and living during stressful times. 

If you are an undergrad at UVa reading this: for you, this document is meant to be an invitation to rethink your relationship to the University. Is it a product you buy? A club you join? Or a community to which you both owe and are owed? We stress this last relationship as a way to push back against two ways of talking about undergrads that we find equally damaging. One insists you are all individually and exclusively responsible for your choices during the pandemic--*“You keep UVa safe.”* The other argues that students are totally absolved from blame because it is the University (or the state, or the federal government) which is ultimately at fault for the crisis. Neither of these can be totally true. If we are to take seriously the interconnectedness of our UVA community, all of us are responsible for the good and harm we send into the world--and, indeed, into the interconnected web of relationships in which we live. Certainly, those with more power than we have are responsible for structuring that web in ways that keep all of us safe. But just because they have abdicated their responsibility doesn’t mean we need to as well.
If you are a worker at UVA reading this: we wrote this document as fellow workers in an act of solidarity. We know first-hand the sudden and punishing increase in workload, the pressure to compromise our health to do our jobs, the expectation that high standards continue to be met in the face of crisis. UVA was asking a great deal from its workers even before the pandemic, and didn’t pay most of them nearly enough, particularly the Black and Brown employees and contract workers who constitute the majority of its dining and custodial staff. This is only more true now. The solutions to this inequity do not live in more task forces or one-time emergency financial aid. We deserve raises fixed to the cost of living and full healthcare coverage. We deserve hazard pay when we’re asked to risk our lives for our jobs. We deserve a hand in governing the University, because without us, there would be no University. 
If you are a faculty worker: 
If you are a decision maker, a person with power, a Dean, Provost, VP or President at UVA reading this: the following are not suggestions or pleas, but demands. We add them to the growing list of demands from the Black Student Alliance, the #6Asks Campaign, the labor union, and more. In so many regards, UVa does not behave like the publicly owned, publicly accountable institution that it markets itself as, in large part because it is increasingly privately owned and financed. Some of you may resent this as much as we do, but resenting is not enough. As fellow academics, we understand the impulse to claim relative powerlessness in a world governed by dominating structures. But you do have power. You have people on your payrolls. You can grant your workers healthcare. You can do away with grades. You can lobby politicians with more power and money than any of us. We all have levers we can pull. So, from you, we demand change at the root. We admit, it does sound a little silly typed out on a website, but only because typing it out is not the work. The work is ongoing, and lives elsewhere (even as we hope that what we’re doing here matters). We certainly don’t need you to win--please don’t take that too personally--but we could always use your help.  
We’ve divided the Manifesto under the following headings, presented alphabetically. Some of the bullets and stated demands are repeated across sections, and certain sections link to and from one another. This was done intentionally to gesture towards the interconnectedness of these issues. Connection can be intimidating for those of us invested in making change--we’re often left confronting the enormity of the problem, asking ourselves, “Where do I start?” After a year of exploring connectivity and community at UVA, we suggest that the answer can be: “Anywhere, which is also everywhere.” 

### ACCESSIBILITY
Even prior to the pandemic, many undergraduates in need of disability accommodations did not receive them. Much of this was due to medical gatekeeping and the reactive, not proactive, way the current system is set up (for example, a student may only be referred to SDAC after their grades begin to fall.) An estimated 2/3 of disabled college students “don’t receive accommodations simply because their colleges don’t know about their disabilities.” Jay Timothy Dolmage points out in Academic Ableism that most students who do receive accommodations don’t get them until their third or fourth year of college. During the pandemic, all these same restrictions apply. Indeed, it may now be more difficult for students to get diagnoses as medical screenings are put off or deprioritized. 
The move to online learning was not inherently or necessarily a barrier to students who need accommodations. In many places, the shift further normalized good practices such as recording lectures, providing captioning for all live and recorded events, offering asynchronous options for courses, and so on. However, the overall desire to replicate “normal” rhythms of work and assessment have reified barriers for some students and created new challenges for others.
More than half of college age students in the United States reported that they were “moderately”, “very” or “extremely” worried about their mental health. Some students have become caretakers as they live at home; others have struggled with job loss (their own or their parents’) and added financial stress. Many have lost family members to the virus. 
What do instructors do when over half their students struggle to some degree with mental health? What do disability centers and resource officers do? The pandemic has demanded a more capacious, generous approach to defining and addressing disability, one which does not stigmatize students for needing accommodations or treat their requests with paranoia and suspicion. It requires that, moving forward, universities design their pedagogical practices around universal principles that no longer demand students pursue individual solutions to what are so often social problems around access and health.  
Equity (link to Justice) and Overwork (link to Labor) 
A pedagogical practice that does not take students’ greater personal and social contexts into account is by definition inaccessible. To that end, we demand the following: 
Mandate training for all classroom instructors (from tenured faculty to graduate TAs) related to classroom and pedagogical accessibility and SDAC procedures.
Integrate real, substantive breaks into the academic calendar which are respected by students & faculty alike.
Increase funding for SDAC and ensure that SDAC is equipped to handle a wider range of disabilities. 
Increase funding and capacity for CAPS so that students are not pushed into the city and county’s already-overburdened mental healthcare system. 
Offer a wider range of options for support in the classroom that rely less on individual faculty discretion. 
To our fellow instructors, we make the following requests:
Familiarize yourselves with and incorporate Universal Design for Learning (UDL) into your course design. UDL’s flexible, inclusive framework puts less pressure on individual students to ask for accommodations and instead prioritizes accessibility to the benefit of all students.
Familiarize yourselves with SDAC and the legal rights of students with disabilities, with the understanding that serving students’ range of needs is a part of good pedagogy.  
To our fellow students, we ask the following:
[something about students creating a better environment for talking about and living with academic ableism day-to-day]
When in doubt, reach out. We hope you can think of learning as a communal enterprise rather than an individual one, built on relationships and empathy. We know as well as you do that some faculty are less inclined to accommodate the needs of their students, but many instructors are here to help as long as they know help is needed. 

### ASSESSMENT
<div id="assessment">
The culture of perfectionism and high achievement is pervasive throughout the United States’ higher ed system, but is perhaps especially pronounced at UVa. Having both worked as instructors and learned as students here, we recognize the incredible strain undergraduates are placed under to do well in what can often be a highly competitive academic environment. 
Competition, however, is not conducive to a deep and generative pedagogical relationship between students and their peers, or between students and instructors. It turns instructors into gatekeepers and students into grade seekers. 
Furthermore, the pursuit of grades produces labor-intensive but, ultimately, low-value work for faculty and their student assistants. Much of the “bullshitification” of academic labor, to borrow anthropologist David Graeber’s phrase, stems from giving and recording letter grades.
The combination of these factors has always made grade letter assessment a fraught task for instructors to do and an overinflated goal for students to chase. During the pandemic, the University was convinced through concerted student activism to extend the Credit/No Credit option through the end of the 2020-2021 school year. Conditions pre-pandemic were hardly ideal either, however. 
Assessment can be a powerful tool either for or against classroom accessibility. Tools such as deadlines and letter grades, when implemented in a rigid manner, function as disciplinary mechanisms rather than effective pedagogical ones. 
Teachers should also do their best to eliminate assessment bias. This involves reevaluating what is being assessed so that prior academic experience and background are reflected in the grading process  and certain expectations (such as having a refined style or voice, correct grammar, handwriting, etc.) are deemphasized over content.  
To this end, we demand the following:
That the University adopt a permanent and universal CR/NC option for all undergraduate work, as implemented at Brown University and other institutions of higher ed.
That the University eliminates all grade point averages and the Dean’s List. 
That, short of universal CR/NC, the University eliminates the practice of grading to a specific average or “on a curve.” 
That the University eliminates the Honor Code and the Honor Committee. 
That the University hires more full-time, tenure track faculty from more diverse backgrounds to facilitate smaller class sizes and the possibility of more written feedback and more personalized assessment styles such as contract grading. 
That the University permanently waives the SAT requirement and other standardized testing scores for admission.
Instructors:
More comprehensive and equitable means of assessment =/= “more work” for you necessarily
Get to know your students as people lol -- even if this is just how you read their work. Don’t think of them as your adversaries, don’t let them become invisible just bc the class is big
Students:
GPA/other markers of competitive academic performance are better markers of able bodiedness, material wealth, racial privilege, and other social inequities than they are of your performance. That doesn’t mean that if you have a 4.0 you didn’t earn it, but that there are better methods of describing your intellectual needs and accomplishments (e.g. written feedback, peer assessment, etc.)
Learning is work, and our methods of assessment need to better reflect the labor you put into your assignments and coursework. Look for instructors and courses that honor your effort, rather than encourage you to look for shortcuts. 
</div>

### CLASSROOMIFICATION
Many instructors understandably want to replicate the conditions of the physical classroom as much as possible in their digital teaching space. However, this desire has manifested itself in the urge to surveil and police our students as they go about their remote learning. This includes the use of software such as Proctorio and Turnitin, but also extends to smaller practices such as forcing students to keep their cameras on during Zoom classes or requiring all students to take exams at the same time, regardless of time zone differences.
This suspicious and ultimately controlling approach towards students feeds into the use of what Jeffrey Moro defines as “cop shit”: “any pedagogical technique or technology that presumes an adversarial relationship between students and teachers.” Educational technology like Proctorio that track student movement certainly falls under this category, but so do militant tardy or absence policies, assignments that require copying out honor code statements, and any interface with actual cops, including reporting students’ immigration status to ICE or calling cops on students in classrooms.
Why are instructors incentivized to be mistrustful of their own students, particularly at an institution where student “honor” is so highly prized? 
The honor system itself is designed to create anxiety that students are cheating without looking at the root cause of “academic misconduct,” leading to a pedagogical framework that is based on punishment instead of repair
As graduate students, we’ve gone through the system as both students subject to the Honor Code and instructors tasked with enforcing it. This creates unhealthy dynamics between students and teachers.
Trusting students requires strong interpersonal relationships and more individualized pedagogy (link to Accessibility), which is difficult to attain in person and can feel even more difficult to attain online. There are no shortcuts to building healthy classrooms, virtual or otherwise, but UVA is also not sufficiently supporting its teaching staff to do that work. 
Reproducing the classroom in “the digital world” has also relied heavily on labor of university support staff. Due to their small numbers to begin with and an increase in need of their services, University support staff have become even more overburdened than they were before the pandemic. 
Digital pedagogy is valuable in and of itself, but also should not be seen as either a replacement for in-person teaching or as an excuse to pay faculty and staff less because it is comparatively “low effort.” In many cases, good digital pedagogy requires more labor than in-person teaching. We need more training and resources to ensure digital assets are kept up-to-date and accessible. We need more time to make digital pedagogy comprehensive and engaging. 
We also recognize that interpersonal relationships between students and teachers are different between virtual and in-person spaces, and teachers should be encouraged to maximize the potential of both rather than having to choose or value one over the other. Rather than thinking of the digital as an inferior simulation of “real pedagogy,” we encourage students and teachers alike to see it as its own realm with its own set of challenges, joys, responsibilities, and ethics. It is not a shortcut.
To this end, we demand:
That the University discourages the use of all proctoring software such as Proctorio and ProctorU.
More broadly, that the University ensures that the implementation of digital technologies is consensual and accessible for students and faculty alike. 
That the University pauses any and all pursuits of large-scale remote and online learning programs to ensure full faculty involvement and buy-in. 
That the University hires more teaching and support staff who are appropriately compensated for their labor.
Instructors:
Don’t use proctoring software it doesn’t make your life easier
Give students the benefit of the doubt--if you’re stressed they’re probably stressed too
Think more of cheating is a symptom of larger problems, not a problem in and of itself
Embrace flexibility for yourself and your students!!!!!!!!
Embrace the possibilities of digital pedagogy/DH while resisting administrative control over your teaching
Students:
Keep agitating with your fellow students against school’s use of anti-plagiarism software and know your rights re: consenting to having your data harvested
Embrace the possibilities of digital pedagogy/DH while resisting administrative control over your learning
[link back to accessibility] Learn to advocate for yourself as best you can. While it’s unfair that students with more needs must expend more energy on speaking up for themselves, the best way to mobilize instructors is to confront them with the problem.

### JUSTICE
Many instructors, ourselves included, consider teaching students about social inequalities and resistance towards them an essential part of what we do in the classroom. This practice is limited, however, by the context of the institutions within which we learn and teach. 
The University of Virginia has a violent history of upholding white supremacist, eugenicist, and colonial ideologies. That history is reproduced daily in the labor and social relations of the University, as well as in the University’s larger relationship with the surrounding city of Charlottesville and its permanent residents. 
We know that people, organizations, and institutions within the University are committed to improving the University’s record on racial justice, particularly its treatment of Black and Brown students and workers. We want to use this space to point to some of these ongoing efforts. 
Racial Equity Task Force
Equity Center
Religion, Race, and Democracy Lab
Democracy Initiative
Black Student Alliance
President’s Commission on the University in the Age of Segregation
At the same time, there is a deep contradiction between the actions and initiatives of some of the University’s employees and the position of the University as an institution. We can begin with the school’s recent decision to bring back thousands of undergraduate students for in-person classes in Fall of 2020, prioritizing its own bottom line over the health and safety of Charlottesville residents, particularly Black and Brown workers at the University. This decision must be placed into the greater context of historic harm UVA has inflicted upon low-income and minority residents in Charlottesville. It also should consider the pandemic, which is having a disproportionate impact on Black and Hispanic wage workers.
Zooming out, we point to the University’s embeddedness within the prison industrial complex, its use of an armed police force which harasses Black and Brown students, and--as argued by our preceding Praxis cohort--its direct involvement in the erosion of affordable housing in Charlottesville. 
This tension cannot, we argue, be resolved solely with initiatives that originate within the power holders of the University. They necessitate a combination of worker, student, and tenant power. While we continue to organize outside the strict boundaries of our academic selves towards these ends, however, we also use this space to demand the following:
That the University terminate its contracts with Aramark and other private contractors and rehire all workers as direct employees.
That the University immediately raise all minimum wages, including those for student employees, to $15/hour and peg the wage to the cost of living in Charlottesville.
That, in the words of the 2019-2020 Praxis Cohort, the University “consider the actions and policies of the UVA Foundation and its subsidiaries when evaluating the impact of the University on local communities.” This is especially critical with regards to the impact of the Foundation’s land-buying practices on local housing availability and affordability.
That the University sticks to its promise to support the development of up to 1,500 affordable housing units in Charlottesville by 2030, and that it does so in partnership with low income and unhoused residents and their advocates.
That the University commits to achieving an undergraduate and graduate student body which reflects the racial and gender demographics of the Commonwealth of Virginia by 2030.
That the University commits to setting aside a permanent endowment to fund scholarships both for the descendents of enslaved workers who helped build and maintain UVA, and members of the Monacan Indian Nation, on whose stolen land the University sits. 
Instructors:
As a bare minimum: teach this history. Make sure your students leave UVA aware of the inequities this institution creates.
Engage in workplace organizing, particularly forms which find commonality between your own position and those of staff at the University.
Build ties to the community in which you live. Don’t stay in the University bubble!
Students:
Embrace and acknowledge your responsibility to the community of UVA and Charlottesville, and the relative power and privilege you may have as a student.
As each other’s best advocates, talk to and learn about your fellow students.
Listen and collaborate with longtime residents, who know best what they need. At the same time, don’t let your limited time at UVA become an excuse to not get involved. 

### LABOR
Even if we only think of pedagogy as “what happens in the classroom”--a perspective this Manifesto expressly argues against, but one its authors recognize many people adopt--we must still acknowledge that pedagogy is work. As such, it deserves to be framed, discussed, and compensated in those terms. While education workers often talk about our love for our jobs and our students before all else, the truth is that more often than not, the work will not love us back. Indeed, love for the work is something our employers weaponize against us to justify paying us smaller wages, granting fewer benefits, and denying us stable employment.
Like many peer institutions of higher ed, UVA does not like to talk about the labor it hires to do the work of the University. Instead, UVA’s administrators largely prefer to center the experience of undergraduate students, even as the pandemic has underscored more than ever the labor which makes those experiences possible. From teaching labor in classrooms, to the work of administration and technical support, to the labor of custodial and dining staff, to the lifesaving efforts of doctors, nurses, and medical staff: UVA’s tens of thousands of workers made sure the work of the University continued during the pandemic. 
Last Fall, UVA promised its students an “on Grounds experience” which was delivered through the sacrifice of workers. While the University’s administration has often thanked its employees, it has repeatedly neglected to give them hazard pay for risking their health to keep the University safe for in-person classes and events. It did not offer staff additional pay for their additional labor. It has kept the hospital short staffed and hospital employees overworked. It has forced and pressured employees to work in person when they didn’t feel safe doing so. 
We simply cannot imagine good pedagogy being produced under such precarious, stressful, and materially demanding conditions. This does not mean workers aren’t giving their all--in many cases, faculty, staff, and other employees have given everything they have and more. Rather, it means that the University’s leaders have not created the necessary conditions to support and sustain these workers. Yoga classes are meaningless for workers who are too busy to attend them. Mindfulness workshops don’t help a graduate student instructor afford her rent. Cheery emails from administrators don’t make up an undergraduate student worker’s missed shifts and lost pay.
While the particular stresses and circumstances of the past year have been somewhat unique, the underlying causes are much older. It was only in 2019 that President Ryan raised the hourly wage of full time workers at UVA to $15 an hour, a victory won by student and worker activists after decades of organizing. Student workers continue to be excluded from this policy, with our hourly minimum wage remaining at $8.75 an hour (to be raised to $9.50 in May 2021). 
Low pay is just one of many ways in which the University devalues those who work in its most critical positions. The janitor who cleans the classroom, the dining worker who serves students their meals, the technicians who maintain our electronic devices, the nurses and doctors treating students at Student Health, all have as much a hand in fulfilling the mission of the University as faculty and teaching staff. Yet rarely do we see these workers treated with the respect--nevermind given the compensation--they deserve. Instead, they’re  inevitably the first to lose pay, lose shifts, and lose jobs when money is tight. Many of these workers are employed through private contractors such as Aramark, a company known for its unfair and discriminatory labor practices. Privatization itself is a shift away from equitable labor standards, as wage workers from Charlottesville--many of them Black and Brown women--are left with jobs with the least security and the lowest pay.
As a public institution of higher education, we believe UVA should set the standard for worker compensation and treatment in the Commonwealth. Not only would this be an enormous step towards fulfilling the University’s stated commitment to racial and gender equity; it would promote the level of pedagogical excellence the University continuously aspires to achieve. 
To that end, we demand:
That the University immediately raise all minimum wages, including those for student employees, to $15/hour and peg the wage to the cost of living in Charlottesville.
That the University terminate its contracts with Aramark and other private contractors and rehire all workers directly. 
That the University compensate its workers with hazard pay for all hours worked in-person since the beginning of the pandemic in March 2020.
That the University ends its current hiring freeze and commits to replacing all wage and general faculty positions with tenure track lines by 2024, with priority given to personnel currently in those positions.
Instructors:
While UVA has not yet embraced full adjunctification, the unequal circumstances among wage, general, and tenure/tenure-track faculty point to the University’s cost-based priorities when it comes to hiring instructors. Instructors must resist any further efforts to expand wage/general faculty positions and [something about the death of tenure, only solution is solidarity among instructors and bw instructors & other workers]
Students:
Point to resources (UVA RAs, union, MutualAid) 

### POWER
Who makes decisions at the University, and how is it governed? For an institution which has recently invested so much financial and intellectual capital in the study of democracy, UVA--like most workplaces in the United States--remains a deeply undemocratic institution. By this, we mean that decisions are made in a top-down manner without the input of the vast majority of students and workers who study and work here, much less residents in the surrounding city who must live with the consequences of these decisions. 
Intruding upon this internal, bureaucratically enforced hierarchy of decision-making are the social hierarchies we encounter everywhere we go: hierarchies of white supremacy and heteropatriarchy, hierarchical labor relations, hierarchies of nationality, and so on. For this reason, not all students are equally powerless (or powerful); some are given more permission to act freely than others. Black students worry about the potential violence behind every exchange with University Ambassadors; white students may ask them to take a picture of their friend group. Largely white, male fraternity members may act recklessly and help bring about COVID lockdown restrictions which are enforced more heavily among the University’s Black and Brown student body. 
There is no straightforward solution to these inequities at UVA, not only because UVA is an institution which still produces and benefits from these inequities but because UVA is not an island. Nevertheless, that does not mean efforts for change are futile. If one of the missions of the public university is to teach students how to be good citizens of the world, then surely lessons in democratic self-governance must take priority. 
By this we do not merely mean the procedural lessons some students learn through participating in the Student Council, which as of Spring 2020, puts on a performance of governance far more than it actually creates policy. We envision even more than giving students and workers a “seat at the table”--we want the table itself! In the interim, however, students and workers must slowly seize and carve out more and more power for themselves within the University they create.
To that end we demand:
Voting power for both the student and the faculty representative on the Board of Visitors.
Elections of all higher level University administrative positions, from Deans up to the President. 
Instructors:
link to contract grading, link to resources on how to design a syllabus with students
link to something about faculty governance (Chris Newfield’s research?)
Students:
As individuals we have relatively little power compared to the people who run this university, but as a collective we can do a lot. [link to ongoing student activism at UVA and at other universities]

### VALUE
The ongoing demand as of March 2021 for an undergraduate tuition freeze at the University of Virginia has raised a range of questions regarding the value of a digital education. Students feel they are not getting what they were promised while attending Zoom University: no in-person mentoring from professors, no valuable connections with peers, no enriching experiences in the cities and towns their schools are located in. As the pandemic continued into Fall of 2020, tuition-paying students at UVA and elsewhere started questioning what it was, exactly, they were paying tens of thousands of dollars for. 
These calls for reduced tuition during the pandemic, often framed by students and their parents as wanting to pay less for an inferior product, sparked anger and frustration among many university instructors, who identified students as misunderstanding the purpose of tuition. “The tuition isn’t paying the ‘bills’ as you might imagine it,” sociologist Tressie McMillan Cottom wrote in a Tweet pointing out that the majority of tuition revenue goes towards paying for instruction. In other words, tuition is where most universities--public and private alike--find money to pay for the teaching labor on which their institutions run.
This is no less true for UVA. Indeed, the fact was brought up at a February Board of Visitors meeting as part of the University’s justification for proposing a tuition increase. Resources from that increase “would definitely be tied to compensation for our faculty and staff,” Vice President J. J. Davis announced.
The contest over freezing tuition over a “lesser product” and appropriately compensating University staff for their labor is almost entirely the product of austerity and artificial scarcity. State funding for higher education has been steadily declining in Virginia (and elsewhere) for several decades. In the same February 2021 Board of Visitors meeting where the Board discussed increasing tuition, Vice President Davis pointed out that “over the past thirty years we have seen the responsibility of higher education funding shift from the taxpayer--the state--to students and their families.”
In this scarcity environment, it is deeply unsurprising that University employees would perceive student calls for tuition freezes and refunds as a threat to their own compensation. We would like to suggest that a tuition freeze is just and necessary; AND, a virtual or remote education is not inherently inferior to an in-person one; AND, that austerity is a choice, not an economic inevitability. Students and their families should not be going into debt for college education even in pre-pandemic circumstances. 
Education is a right, especially public education, which is what UVA offers. The added factor of an economic recession and soaring unemployment means that freezing--if not reducing--tuition for the foreseeable future is the only moral and equitable position the University can take.
In addition, we argue that the reason why the past two semesters have felt drained of value is because the University has not devoted the adequate resources and careful consideration to making remote learning an enriching experience. Instead, decision makers have allowed the stress and limitations of remote learning to amplify pre-existing bad practices until they are basically unsustainable. 
Zoom learning has made worse the things which already were not working. Grades, deadlines, large classes, overworked staff, inaccessible course design, strained mental health resources: all need fixing, and fixing soon. 
Very few of the issues we’ve outlined here are unique to UVA. However, we feel it is important to highlight how these big structures manifest in local and specific ways, shaped by local histories of domination and resistance. We do this to reassert how proximate we all are to the problem, as well as the solutions.

### CLOSINGS
To demonstrate an alternative to the University’s overall approach to hybrid learning this past year, we offer our own time at the Scholars’ Lab as a counterexample. 
The six of us have spent the past academic year meeting remotely, two to three times a week, to learn entirely new skills with an almost entirely new group of people. We are all fully funded, with finances dealt with in an upfront and transparent way. We had assignments with flexible deadlines and no grades, were encouraged to collaborate, and deliberately fostered an environment of mutual care, respect, and friendship. We established connections over Zoom, WeChat, Slack, and Discord; had movie and game nights and met all of one another’s pets. We became friends.
We don’t think we’ve succeeded at building a community because we’re special people with special skills (who isn’t?), but because we were given the necessary environment in which to flourish, in spite of the chaos in our lives and in the world. We succeeded because, as Brandon Walsh kept reminding us, “You’re already successes in our eyes.”
What would the past two semesters at UVA have looked like if every administrator, instructor, and student had approached the pedagogical experience along these lines? If decision-makers had looked at online learning, not as a financial opportunity or a challenge to be forced onto teachers and students, but as a space to find new ways to build community? Would they have felt so pressured to bring students back to put themselves, University employees, and the surrounding community at risk? Would professors have kept up draconian grading and deadline policies? Would students have struggled so much to feel they were learning and building community?
-->